# Hypergraph k-cut algorithms

## Building

You will need cmake, boost, and a c++17 compiler.

```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

## Testing

To run the tests, run `make test`. The tests will run several cut algorithms on small problems and verify that everything is working correctly.

## Usage

To generate hypergraphs, run `./hgen <num_vertices> <num_edges> <sampling percentage>`. Scroll down to see available generators. 

To run the algorithm, run `./hcut <input file> <k> <algorithm>`. For example, if you want to run the algorithm from [CX'18], you would run `./hcut <input file> 2 CX`. Scroll down to the bottom for a list of algorithms. 

To generate sparse certificates (from CX '18), run `./hsparsify <input file> <c>`, to generate a sparse certificate of the hypergraph in the input file with cut values preserved up to `c`. The output hypergraph will be written to a file with the same name as the input file except with `sparse_` prefixed to it, i.e. `sparse_<input file>`.

The list of algorithms is available below. Note that some algorithms only work for k = 2 and some will prompt for extra
parameters (such as an approximation factor).

## Hypergraph Generators

The following problem instances can be generated with `./hgen`:

### Type 1

Informally, this generator produces a hypergraph with hyperedges and edge weights chosen in a random manner. 

It takes the following parameters:
- `n`: the number of vertices in the hypergraph
- `m`: the number of hyperedges in the hypergraph
- `p`: the sampling probability

For each hyperedge `e`, it includes each vertex into `e` with probability `p`. Hyperedge weights are sampled uniformly in [1, 100].

For example, using `n = 100`, `m = 200`, and `p = 0.5` will create a hypergraph with `100` vertices and `200` hyperedges, where each vertex has a `50%` chance of being in each hyperedge.

### Type 2

Informally, this generator produces well-connected clusters of reasonably large size. 

It takes the following parameters:
- `n`: number of vertices
- `m`: number of hyperedges
- `p`: sampling probability
- `k`: number of clusters
- `P`: weight multiplication factor.

In this generator the vertices are divided into `k` uniform clusters.

The generating process is similar to Type 1, except that there is an additional check for whether a hyperedge is completely contained within some cluster. If so, then its weight is multiplied by `P`.

For example, using `n = 99`, `m = 200`, `p = 0.3`, `k = 3`, and `P = 100` will generate a hypergraph with `100` vertices,
`200` hyperedges, where the vertices are partitioned into three clusters of `~33` vertices each, each vertex has a 30% chance of
being in any hyperedge, and the weight of all hyperedges that are entirely within a cluster is multiplied by 100.

### Type 3

This generator produces constant rank hypergraphs. It takes the following parameters:
- `n`: number of vertices
- `m`: number of hyperedges
- `r`: rank

A hyperedge is generated by sampling `r` vertices without replacement. This process is repeated for `m` hyperedges. Note that hyperedges may contain self-loops.

For example, using `n = 100`, `m = 200`, and `r = 3`, will generate a hypergraph of rank 3 with 100 vertices and 200 hyperedges.

### Type 4

This generator produces hypergraphs with uniformly random equal-sized clusters such that no hyperedges span the clusters.
It takes the following parameters:
- `n`: number of vertices
- `d`: number of hyperedges per cluster
- `k`: number of clusters
- `p`: sampling probability
- `P`: edge weights in range [1, 100P]

Generation is similar to type 1, except that for each hyperedge vertices are only sampled from one cluster of `n/k` vertices.

For example, using `n = 100`, `d = 200`, `k = 3`, `p = 0.5`, `P = 10` will generate a hypergraph with 100 vertices, 600 edges, and 3 clusters, with 200 edges in each cluster. The chance that any vertex appears within a hyperedge in the same cluster is 50%, and hyperedge weights are in the range [1, 1000].

### Type 5

This generator groups the vertices into clusters, and samples some hyperedges from within each cluster (inter-cluster hyperedges) and samples some hyperedges from all vertices. The generator assigns larger weight to hyperedges that are completely contained in clusters compared to hyperedges that span components. This encourages non-trivial min-cuts.

It takes the following parameters:
- `n` : number of vertices
- `m1`: number of hyperedges that lie entirely within each cluster
- `p1`: sampling probability for m1 inter-cluster hyperedges
- `m2`: number of hyperedges that are sampled from all vertices
- `p2`: sampling probability for m2 hyperedges
- `k` : number of clusters
- `P` : weight multiplier for hyperedges that are entirely contained within a single component

This seems to be the most straight-forward way to generate interesting hypergraphs with non-skewed min k-cuts. Some care in
the choice of parameters must be taken though: specifically, the expected number of hyperedges that a vertex is present should
be much greater than the weight of a hyperedge crossing a component. That is, `E[# hyperedges that contain v] * P >> weight of hyperedge that crosses between components`.

For example, using `n = 100`, `m1 = 20`, `p1 = 0.3`, `m2 = 10`, `p2 = 0.4`, `k=3`, `P = 10` will generate a hypergraph with 100 vertices, three equal sized clusters, 20 hyperedges lying entirely within each cluster that samples within the cluster with probability 0.3, 10 hyperedges that are sampled from all vertices with probability 0.4, and all hyperedges that are entirely within a cluster have weight multiplied by 10. Weights are ignored for unweighted hypergraphs.


### Type 6

This generator lays out the vertices in a ring, and creates `n - 1` hyperedges of `r` adjacent hyperedges. This creates
hypergraphs with predictable cuts.

It takes the following parameters:
- `n` : number of vertices
- `r` : size of each hyperedge

For example, using `n = 100` and `r = 3` will create a hypergraph with 100 vertices and 99 edges, where each edge is of the form `{v_i, v_{i+1}, ..., v_{i+r-1}}` for vertices 1 through 99.

## Algorithms

KW: The hypergraph min-cut algorithm described in [KW'96]. Based on vertex orderings. Implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/order.hpp`.

Q: The hypergraph min-cut algorithm described in [Q'98]. Based on vertex orderings. Implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/order.hpp`.

MW: The hypergraph min-cut algorithm described in [MW'00]. Based on vertex orderings. Implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/order.hpp`.

CXY: The hypergraph min k-cut algorithm described in [CXY'18]. Based on random contractions. Implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/cxy.hpp`.

FPZ: The hypergraph min k-cut algorithm described in [FPZ'19]. Based on random contractions. Implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/fpz.hpp`.

CX: The (2+epsilon)-approximate hypergraph min-cut algorithm described in [CX'18]. Based on vertex orderings. Implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/approx.hpp`.

KK: The (1+epsilon)-approximate min-cut algorithm for constant rank hypergraphs described in [KK'14]. Based on random contractions. Implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/kk.hpp`.

Hypergraph min-cut on unweighted hypergraphs may use the sparse certificate detailed in [CX'18]. It is implemented in `hypergraph/include/hypergraph/certificate.hpp`.

## Input format

The input file containing the hypergraph instance should be in hMETIS hypergraph format.

For unweighted graphs the input should look like:
```
<number of hyperedges> <number of vertices>
<hyperedge>
<hyperedge>
...
```

With real numbers, this would look like:
```
3 6
0 1
1 2 3
2 3 4 5
2 4 5
4 5 3 0
3 2 1 5
```

For weighted graphs the input file should look like:
```
<number of hyperedges> <number of vertices> 1
<hyperedge weight> <hyperedge>
<hyperedge weight> <hyperedge>
<hyperedge weight> <hyperedge>
...
```

Here, the hyperedge weight can be a non-negative decimal number:
```
3 6
0.342 0 1
1.23 1 2 3
10.34 2 3 4 5
2351 2 4 5
5.172 4 5 3 0
3 3 2 1 5
```

## References

[KW'96] Klimmek, R. and Wagner, F., 1996. A Simple Hypergraph Min Cut Algorithm

[Q'98] Queyranne, M., 1998. Minimizing symmetric submodular functions

[MW'00] Mak, W. and Wong, D., 2000. A fast hypergraph min-cut algorithm for circuit partitioning

[M'05] Mak, W., 2005, Faster Min-Cut Computation in Unweighted Hypergraphs/Circuit Netlists

[KK'14] Kogan, D. and Krauthgamer, R., 2014. Sketching Cuts in Graphs and Hypergraphs

[CXY'18] Chandrasekaran, K., Xu, C., and Yu, X., 2018, Hypergraph k-Cut in Randomized Polynomial Time

[CX'18] Chekuri, C. and Xu, C., 2018. Minimum Cuts and Sparsification in Hypergraphs.

[FPZ'19] Fox, K., Panigrahi, D., and Zhang, F., 2019, Minimum Cut and Minimum k-Cut in Hypergraphs via Branching Contractions
